---RESUME---
Brian Matzelle
Garden City, NY | (516) 413-2823 | bmatzel1@binghamton.edu | LinkedIn | Porfolio | GitHub
EDUCATION
Binghamton University, SUNY | Thomas J. Watson College of Engineering and Applied Science	
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science	Expected May 2024
Relevant Coursework: Data Structures & Algorithms, Design Patterns, Design & Analysis of Algorithms, Intro to Machine Learning, Programming Languages, Java OOP, Advanced Computer Architecture
TECHNICAL SKILLS
Languages: Python, Javascript,  C++, HTML, CSS, SQL, Rust, C,  Java, Go
Frameworks & Software: AWS, Temporal, Google Cloud,  Node, React, NLP, spaCy, Microsoft SQL Server, React Native, Next.js, Expo, React Navigation, Git, Windows, MacOS, Linux, XGBoost, sklearn, LangChain, FAISS
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
Software Engineer Intern, Med-Metrix | Garden City, NY	June 2023 - December 2023
Eliminated overnight model training after refactoring XGBoost classification model, increasing performance by 200%
Preprocessed proprietary language data to finetune Falcon-7b large language model (LLM) to write insurance appeals
Improved classification model accuracy from 80% to 90% by refining data preprocessing methods to heighten efficacy of written appeals and optimizing revenue potential
Built data extraction pipelines with Airbyte’s CDK to ingest FHIR resources into S3 buckets via custom connectors, helping with database cloud migration
Designed an LLM workflow with LangChain for accurate patient medical record retrieval, creating dedicated FAISS vector stores for each patient, and generating appeal documents
Collaborated closely with legal experts to ensure AWS development environments remained HIPAA compliant when projects included Protected Health Information (PHI)
Co-Founder & Software Engineer,  OnePolicy, LLC | Vestal, NY	November 2022 - May 2023
Spearheaded Next.js website prototypes to validate complex technical solutions before full-scale implementation
Demonstrated adept project management abilities through the effective use of agile methodologies, including task prioritization and meticulous project timeline monitoring, ensuring on-time delivery of high-quality website updates
Cultivated strong project management skills by implementing agile methodologies, effectively prioritizing tasks, and closely Translated business requirements into precise React Native technical specifications, seamlessly integrating web-app functionalities and managing third-party API interactions
Improved project execution by devising strategies, enhancing internal communication, and aligning company expectations
Software Engineer Intern, TJ Russo Consultants | Islandia, NY	June 2022 - August 2022
Collaborated with a team of 4 developers to build an NGINX based live-streaming service to improve client outreach
Utilized Expo library to develop client live-streaming mobile app prototype, bettering the assessment of potential solutions
Developed email templates that contributed to a 10% increase in client engagement.
Optimized the local infrastructure and conducted hardware upgrades, resulting in reduced technical issues and outages, safeguarding time-sensitive revenue streams
KEY PROJECTS
LendaHand, HackBU 2023 Submission	 February 2023
Won Best Civic Engagement Hack, sponsored by J.P. Morgan, for exceptional community impact
Awarded Best Geo Hack, sponsored by CAE, for innovative geospatial application
Outperformed 120+ participants as team lead in 24-hour hackathon by developing cross-platform community outreach app
Called the Google Maps API to display user event locations, enhancing user experience and event planning capabilities
Reddit & Twitch Toxicity Data Analysis	August 2023 - Present
Teamed with 2 classmates to author analytical plan, comparing toxicity on r/LivestreamFail with corresponding Twitch clips
Developed Dockerized data pipeline to scrape new data, judge it with external API, then store it in MongoDB database
Implemented Temporal.io to handle workflow orchestration and scheduling, optimizing retry policies to prevent data loss
Determined communities with the Girvan Newman algorithm and visualized findings with NetworkX knowledge graph
Communicated all proposals and implementations effectively via LaTeX writings, surpassing project criteria
NFL Play Predictor	July 2023 - Present
Cleaned and Preprocessed large tabular datasets using pandas, categorizing data and optimizing it for machine learning
Achieved 66% accuracy of drive outcome based on real play by play statistics with XGBoost classification model
Analyzed the model with sci-kit learn (sklearn), allowing for substantial accuracy improvements after each code refactor
Chat.tv, a Live Streaming AI Chat Service	April 2023 - Present
Multi-threaded app to maintain smooth GUI performance while receiving API responses in real-time
Engineered a simulated live streaming platform enabling small streamers to interact with large language model bots
Integrated SpeechRecognition to transcribe user speech into text for seamless communication with OpenAI API bots
Scaled platform to support 10,000+ bots simultaneously in "livestreaming chat" environment
---END RESUME---

Brian Matzelle is a senior at Binghamton University studying Computer Science.

He enjoys programming, producing music, skateboarding, and playing video games.

---PROGRAMMING/PROJECT DESCRIPTIONS---
I started programming in high school and decided to pursue it once realizing how creative it could be. 
University provided me with strong fundamentals and a passion for learning new technologies, which I continues to do in his free time.
I much prefers to learn by doing, and has worked on a variety of projects, including a live streaming chat service, a reddit and twitch toxicity data analysis, and a play predictor for the NFL.
Being a software engineer has allowed me to combine his love for technology and creativity, and I'm excited to continue to do so in the future.
I developed the live streaming AI chat service over the course of few months for fun. The program allows someone to simulate a Twitch.tv chat room with AI bots, powered by OpenAI. Notably, I learned how to multithread confidently, handle API calls, and build a smooth, responsive UI.
Alongside two classmates, I developed the reddit and twitch toxicity data analysis project over the course of a semester for CS415 Social Media Pipelines, a class at Binghamton University. The Dockerized program runs on a schedule with Temporal, scrapes data from r/LivestreamFail and each clip's corresponding Twitch chat, and analyzes the toxicity of each comment with the ModerateHatespeech API. It then stores the data in a MongoDB database, to later be analyzed by the Mistral Zephyr large language model. The analyzed data is then grouped with the Girvan Newman algorithm, and visualized with NetworkX. I learned how to use Temporal, Dockerize a data pipeline, and use NetworkX to visualize data.
After being introduced to machine learning at his internship at Med-Metrix, I decided to pursue it further. I developed the NFL play predictor over the course of a few weeks for fun, but to also help my team at work. The program uses XGBoost to predict the outcome of a drive based on real play by play statistics. Here, I learned how to use XGBoost, and how to clean and preprocess large tabular datasets.
---END PROGRAMMING/PROJECT DESCRIPTIONS---


---INTERVIEW QUESTIONS---
Approach with Conflict:
In conflict, it's best to be truthseeking. This might manifest differently depending on the situation, whether it be raising the issue with a higher up, or doing research to find the right answer.

Potential Tradeoffs in a Project:
Tradeoffs I've had to make in the past include sacrificing performance for readability, or sacrificing readability for performance. It's important to find the right balance between the two. On a higher level, we've had to sacrifice 

Difficult Problem You Solved:


Optimal Time Management:
Emails in the morning, meetings in the afternoon, and coding in the evening. I find that I'm most productive at night, so I try to schedule my day around that. Also, I definitely prefer to have an uninterupted chunk to dedicate to coding.

Dealing with Close Deadlines:
Communication!

Thoughts on Improving Software Performance:

Thoughts on Communication:

---END INTERVIEW QUESTIONS---